There is a tradition associating various psychiatric disorders with specific cognitive deficits, but this work has consistently shown that these deficits are common across common diagnostic boundaries and simultaneously variable within diagnosis. This has led to the RDOC framework, which focuses on mapping participants of various diagnosis onto common cognitive axis (e.g., social functioning, spatial skills). The current treatments available (pharmacology, behavioural intervention, etc.) also have variable efficacy between people of similar diagnosis, and are typically measured with respect to the individuals performance on some cognitive axis. The treatment of these disorders is hard, because there are often multiple neurological dysfunctions that can lead to a single cluster of cognitive deficits, so pharmacological intervention often begins as a guessing game until the the symptomatology subsides, which can take years. Therefore, there exists a need for a tool that can reliably identify the neural underpinnings of these cognitive traits in a population of people regardless of their psychiatric state.

Cognitive psychology has invested in a large literature mapping between neural activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) via the blood-oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal, and performance on cognitive tasks. At the analysis level, this often manifests as a statistical heat-map representing the location and extent of brain activation in an individual. Typically, the BOLD signal is modeled as the stimulus time-course (a time series representing the onsets of each event in the task) convolved with the expected BOLD response for each event. Finally, a fit is computed between this prediction and the actual data in each participant. These activations tend to be highly variable between individuals as the true BOLD response is known to vary across individuals (), the fMRI signal contains a good deal of non-neural noise (), and brain morphology is known to be variable between individuals, particularly in higher-order brain regions (). At the group level, these activations tend to produce reliable clusters, and subtraction maps can be produced between conditions or diagnostic groups. The intensity or strength of the cluster itself can also be related to the cognitive score of interest.

This method is suboptimal for our purposes for two reasons. First, it supposes we know the group membership a priori, making it difficult to relate the variance in neural activity to the cognitive axes of interest. Second, it seems likely that the BOLD model would co-vary with variance in cognitive performance. The BOLS signal is the product of local brain dynamics (), composed of many interacting microcircuits that are all influenced by the relative proportion of inhibitory / excitatory processes (), and all of this is further modulated by slow-acting neuromodulatory processes (). Since all of the above physiology is known to differ between psychiatric diagnosis, it seems unlikely that we would be able to pre-select a fair BOLD signal model that would treat all cognitive and psychiatric classes fairly.

An alternative method for identifying stimulus-associated neural activity is the inter-subject correlation method, which assumes no particular BOLD signal model or event timing, but requires all participants experience an identical task design (). Signals within brain-regions are then correlated between subjects to identify whether that brain regions participated in a 'shared experience' during the performance of the task. This model would only be sensitive to the relative movements of the BOLD signal, and would capture any covariation, no matter the signals. This method has been shown to be highly sensitive to neural activity (), and can be easily used in natural stimulus-viewing experiments, where neural activity is believed to have higher trial-to-trial reliability than those observed during much less ecologically valid trial or event-based designs (). It has two limitations. First, it is only sensitive to linear relationships between timeseries. This is not believed to be a major limitation since the BOLD signal is approximately a linear function of stimulus intensity up until BOLD signal saturation, which can be controlled through the stimulus design. Second, it does not allow us to identify brain activity caused by a particular trial or event type in a series of events. For example, in a design with trial types A, B, C, and D, say neural activity is only similar between individuals during C. We would detect elevated inter-subject correlations in this data, but we would not be able to say which event caused this synchronization. Therefore, the explanatory power of a model like this is lower than other more involved or traditional methods from cognitive psychology, but it's sensitivity to neural activations are high.

For the purposes of mapping psychiatric populations into cognitive axes, this method would be particularly useful for comparing the neural activity of some unknown participant population, x, with a template population of cognitively normal participants during some behavioural paradigm. All this would require is a reasonable sample of healthy controls (20-30) who have all performed the same tasks and have completed the same psychological assessments. The average time series from a set of brain regions (regions of interest; or ROIs) could be taken from these participants to produce T, a ROI X timepoint matrix of average brain activity, with columns representing each brain region's average activity over the experiment. The same set of ROIs would then be extracted from the template subject and the correlation between these time series would be stored as the feature of interest in the vector c. A classifier could then be trained to reproduce the cognitive scores of the population and evaluated via k-fold cross-validation. With sufficient validation, this model would be able to generalize to unseen participants on the task, which isn't currently possible using traditional methods. Therefore, this approach brings us closer to a biologically-driven test for cognitive performance that applies to all psychiatric populations.

In this paper, we focus on social cognitive performance in those with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Social cognitive deficits are a high risk factor for those with these disorders because it directly influences the course of treatment, and belies a degree of high order cognitive impairment that is quite variable across those with these diagnosis. Patients with poor social functioning do not respond to first-line treatments () and are often better served with more aggressive therapies at the outset. Currently, this isn't normally learned until after a year of failed treatment, and therefore the development of a robust classifier that can detect poor social cognitive performance in populations would be useful to clinical researchers.

One paradigm that has been successful with these populations in the past is the imitate/observe task, which has participants either observing, or actively imitating, emotional faces while receiving an fMRI scan.
